---
layout: page
permalink: /pyschosocial-support-in-epidemics/
categories:
  - North America
  - Europe
---
# Psychosocial support in epidemics

Psychosocial support is a critical component of epidemics preparedness and response. Epidemics can have profound impact on individuals, communities and societies. Depending on the specific nature and size of the outbreak, people are exposed to very distressing experiences such as loss of loved ones, loss of home and property, separation from family members, and disruption of livelihoods or social support structures. This in turn may bring economic consequences and other losses that significantly disrupt a person’s daily routine and sense of normalcy. This is true for the affected communities as well as for staff and volunteers involved in responding to the outbreak. 

Loss of dignity and loss of control are also losses that can have a severe psychosocial impact on the people who have fallen sick. Those who get sick can be stigmatized or even excluded from their family or community. Not only those who have fallen ill, but also individuals who are associated with the disease – such as family members of an infected person, volunteers, health care workers, or persons who have been cleared of the disease – are subject to stigma and risk exclusion from their communities or even families. Fear, stigma and isolation can severely impact individuals, families and whole communities and compromise social connectedness and cohesion. 

## Common psychosocial reactions

Many common psychosocial reactions in epidemic outbreaks are like those in other emergency situations - but other reactions are more typical for epidemic and disease outbreaks. Common reactions to distress include anxiety, sadness, anger, guilt, shame, helplessness, isolation, withdrawal, difficulty concentrating or relating to others, and fear. In addition, common physical reactions to stress include sleeping problems, changes in appetite, headaches and bodily pains, increased heart rate, nausea, fatigue, loss of appetite, exhaustion or worsening of existing physical conditions. Some people react to physical distress by increasing their intake of alcohol, medicine or drugs to lessen their pain, which can lead to further social problems. Physical signs of distress can in the cases of a disease be difficult to differentiate from the actual disease.

​The term *”psychosocial”* refers to the dynamic relationship between  the psychological and social dimension of a person, where the one influences the other. The psychological dimension includes internal, emotional thought processes, feelings and reactions. The social dimension  includes relationships, family and community networks, social value and cultural practices.                                  

**Fear** is one of the most common and widespread reactions among affected populations during an epidemic and can arise for a variety of reasons. In many cases, fear stems from a lack of knowledge, or misinformation, about how the disease is spread, and therefore a lack of correct information about how to protect oneself from contamination. Inadequate information about possible outcomes, treatments and cures can also be a source of fear, as can superstitions that the disease is a curse or a conspiracy. In some cases, the fear stems from a very real threat as there might not be access to appropriate protective measures or for example access to clean latrines and hand wash facilities. It is important to note that fear is not necessarily confined to the directly affected communities as people in other areas or even countries may fear spread of the disease. 

**Grief and loss** are also prominent psychosocial characteristics of an epidemic. When communities are faced with communicable diseases with high mortality rates, the probability is greater that an individual will experience the death of a loved one, a close friend or a colleague. Other forms of loss that may be suffered due to an epidemic include the loss of normal routines, loss of property, security, livelihood, loss of dignity, control, social cohesion and hope. Given that grief is individual, and that people grieve in their own way and in their own time, situations of mass- or widespread loss can affect the future development of a community for years to come. 

**Shame or guilt** may be commonly felt by those who have contracted the disease. These feelings can stem from numerous things including issues related to social stigma, one’s inability to work and therefore contribute to the family, the fear of being a burden on society and the worry of contaminating others. 

**Isolation and withdrawal** can either be by choice due to for example shame and guilt, or because the person(s) who have fallen sick are too exhausted or deprived to interact with others. Or the isolation can be caused by stigmatization from the surrounding community or even family, as well as fear of getting contaminated. This in some cases is a very real threat. In a time where the people who have fallen sick are most vulnerable and need of support, the support system is critical, both in terms of social and practical support. When this is compromised the situation can become dire and critical for the people who are sick.